## Reading Reflections

**Reading Reflection, #1**

*Reading:* Keer, G. (2010). Critical pedagogy and information literacy in community colleges. In Drabinski, E., Kumbier, A., & Accardi (Eds.), *Critical library instruction: Theories and methods* (149-159). Duluth, MN: Library Juice Press.

- *How do you define critical information literacy for yourself?* I define critical information literacy as evaluating information through a critical lens -- knowing questions to ask about information encountered, so as to assess its validity and social context. For librarians teaching critical information literacy, we should strive to teach students the role of information literacy both in their day-to-day lives and in their role as learners and researchers. Critical information literacy ultimately helps students understand the impact and importance of information for them as a whole person. 
- *Do you think this is a valuable perspective on our work?* The perspective Keer presents in the book chapter is very helpful, particularly in the context of community college learners, who may be seeking a more practical, rather than purely theoretical, approach to their education. I agree with this approach, as I tend to think that combining theory and practice is a successful strategy for engaging learners of all kinds. Keer's version of critical information literacy is also more inclusive, and more approachable for first-time researchers. I particularly liked that Keer encourages a mindset that approaches knowledge construction as a social construct--one that can be oppressive, particularly for marginalized audiences--and also emphasizes that research can bring up feelings of inadequacy in us all. Acknowledging the potentially negative emotions associated with information evaluation and research can help us work together to flip the script into a more positive, engaging experience for students. 

**Reading Reflection, #2**

*Reading:* hooks, b. (1994). *Teaching to Transgress.* New York, NY: Routledge.

So far, I've read the introduction, as well as chapters one and two, and I am struck by how much I resonate with hook's words both personally and professionally, even though they were written more than twenty years ago. 

Because hooks advocates so strongly for self-actualization, and for intersection of mind, body, and soul in the classroom, it seems appropriate to talk briefly about my educational background. I was homeschooled up until college, and at least based on the descriptions she provides, it seems that my educational experience was similar to hooks' experiences in her early education. It was joyful, it was exciting, and it fueled my passsion and curiosity. It wasn't until I began my undergraduate studies, and later graduate school, that I started to notice how decidedly un-exciting the academic environment can be, as well as how oppressive it can be. Unlike hooks, I haven't had to contend with racial bias in addition to the "banking system' of education" (1994, p. 14 -- originally proposed by Freire), but I completely agree that academia tends to emphasize passive consumption of information, instead of supporting active student participation in co-creating learning experiences.

Thinking about my own experiences, and hooks' observations, I wonder: how can I make learning more exciting for students? I can only imagine how classes might go if students were asked more often, "What about this topic excites you?" and if more co-design concepts, e.g., co-production of knowledge, were incorporated into classrooms. I've seen this in action before, when I took Participatory Design in Libraries, and put co-design and co-creation of knowledge principles into action while teaching young children how to code and program an Arduino, back in fall quarter 2019. From that experience, I know that it can be really exciting and fun for both the learners and the instructor. I also appreciated hooks' statement that students want to be seen as "whole human beings" (p. 15) and that to accomplish this, we should not reinforce the concept of public and private as separate entities, nor should we insist that students only bring our minds to school--instead we should encourage them to bring their bodies and souls, too. 

One way that I think this can be done is by showing genuine passion and excitement for the topics I care about, and show how they affect my life, both personally and professionally, and by inviting students to do the same. Another way is to show the value of the topic beyond the classroom, that it can have an impact on them personally, both as a student and as a non-student. An additional way is being honest about where I struggle and have made mistakes, so that students don't see academia as an impentetrable fortress where wrong answers are always penalized. 

Ultimately, *Teaching to Transgress* is helping me to see where, in the past, I've sometimes thought that teaching 'wasn't for me.' I think what I've really been responding to, in thinking that, is a rejection of teaching as domination, whereas teaching as liberation and teaching as a means to stronger democracy seems exhilarating, if still full of challenges. 

**Reading Reflection, #3:**

*Reading:* Manca, A., Atenas, J., Ciociola, C., & Nascimbeni, F. (2017). Critical pedagogy and open data for educating towards social cohesion. *Italian Journal of Educational Technology, 25*(1), 111-115. doi:10.17471/2499-4324/917.

While this article could have been more fleshed out and I wish it had contained more practical teaching strategies, I appreciated reading about critical pedagogy concepts as applied to open data. My favorite part of this article talked about how teaching open data can make hidden information visible, and promote substantive democracy (p. 112). "We claim that these dynamics, which influence society by creating or perpetuating its hegemonic structures, can be uncovered, accessed and analysed through the information provided by open data," (p. 112). I also liked how this article talked about how the multi-layered nature of open data works as a blueprint and teaching opportunity for the complex information landscape that we find ourselves in, in this 'Information Age' that includes an information-rich internet. Open data is one opportunity among many to increase our "aptitude to confront and accept the uncertainties and complexities of the socio-cultural reality we inhabit" (p. 114). 

For me, this article affirmed many of the reasons I'm so passionate about open data. The current amount of open data available to us is a wild knowledge space, teeming with opportunity. When we work together, we have the ability to use it to make ourselves more informed, and in the best scenarios, even use it as a force for good in the world. Of course, that's not always the reality, but so far, one of the things I appreciate the most about critical pedagogy is its sense of optimism -- its belief that teaching and learning can be exciting, and even liberating. Open data, in its most ideal applications, is also meant to be liberating. It's meant to free up information to the public, making our democracies stronger and more lucid, and maybe even making us more interested and more excited by the possibilities of government. 

**Reading Reflection, #4:**

*Reading:* Jacobs, H. L. M. (2010). Posing the Wikipedia "problem": Information literacy and the praxis of problem-posing in library instruction. In Drabinski, E., Kumbier, A., & Accardi (Eds.), *Critical library instruction: Theories and methods* (179-197). Duluth, MN: Library Juice Press.

Much like many open data portals, Wikipedia is something of an information wild west, but that's what makes it such an interesting study for information literacy. I found this chapter to be really relevant, and once again, I really appreciate critical pedagogy's focus on not only preparing students for academic success, but for surviving and thriving in their everyday lives. Wikipedia seems to be with us to stay, and it's important that we acknowledge not only that students are using it, and will continue to use it, but also engage with them on both the flaws and the advantages of Wikipedia. Wikipedia is a great case study in how non-academics can produce excellent, well-researched information for the masses, as well as how anyone can easily publish and distribute false information, whether intentionally or not. 

I also really liked Jacobs' activity suggestion, to have students compare a Wikipedia article on a topic to a more standard encyclopaedia entry. I think that's an effective way to talk about both the pros and cons of traditional, peer-reviewed publishing versus nonconvential, user-generated content. They both have strengths and weaknesses, and it's up to us to become information literate enough to evaluate both as sometimes-legitimate sources. 

The other thing I liked about this chapter was that it emphasizes how important it is to tear down the image of the 'Ivory Tower' of academia. In most cases, students will only sojourn in academia for a brief period of their lives, and there are plenty of people who will never spend time there at all. Knowing how to access, evaluate, use, and even improve more mainstream information sources is an essential skill for everyone, and I think one of the premier advantages of critical pedagogy is that its focus on co-production of knowledge helps us do that faster, and in a more authentic way. 

**Reading Reflection, #5:**

*Reading:* Accardi, M.T. (2010). *Feminist pedagogy for library instruction.* Duluth, MN: Library Juice Press.

Accardi's idea of using feminist pedagogy to decenter patriarchy and make space for marginalized voices is very appealing to me, and I also like her focus on being very active in this process. Just talking about present circumstances is unlikely to help, not when we could be taking 'practical steps to end suffering' (p. 12). I also like how honest Accardi is, relating classroom and library experiences where she has encountered resistance to feminist pedagogy. Accardi's personal definition of this is: "feminist pedagogy is broadly concerned with social justice and sees education as a site for social change and transformation, exposing and ending opression against women and all other kinds of marginalization" (p. 27-28). 

While at first glance, it seems like something everyone could support, I suppose I shouldn't be surprised by how controversial 'transformation' of any kind is. Accardi's feminist pedagogy is very similar to other critical pedagogical theories in that it resists passive learning, and promotes active, engaged classrooms where either party, instructor or student, can potentially learn from each other. In fact, Accardi notes that sometimes feminist pedagogy can be mistaken for not being teaching at all, as many students are unaccustomed to an environment with more questions than answers, and limited assertion of authority (p. 31). Feminist pedagogy also adds the elements of being anti-hierarchical, with an emphasis on women's experiences. 

I also liked Accardi's somewhat subtle approaches to 'consciousness-raising' when teaching, for instance, having students research a topic, such as women in computer science, where they'll see, through searching, information about sexism in tech. Especially for students who may be encountering this kind of thinking for the first time, I think gradual methods like this one are more likely to be effective. 

One issue I would love to have the opportunity to ask Accardi about is privileging the student voice. While I agree with this strategy and think it's important to do this not just for critical pedagogy reasons, but for the sake of preparing students for post-degree, when they'll be making decisions and taking charge, I do wonder how to balance it with what seems to be strong demands in higher education today for ROI, mostly owing to how expensive education is now. Conversation that I regularly hear among my own fellow graduate students are along the lines of, 'I'm paying too much money for this to not get answers and/or just discuss ideas with my fellow classmates.' Is the incredibly high cost of education reinforcing what Freire termed the 'banking system of education'? I'm afraid that it is.

**Reading Reflection, #6:**

*Reading:* Fullagar, S., Rich, E., & Francombe-Webb, J. (2017). New Kinds of (Ab)normal?: Public Pedagogies, Affect, and Youth Mental Health in the Digital Age. *Social Sciences 6*(3), 99, 1-12. doi:10.3390/socsci6030099.

This quarter in particular, I've noticed the crushing effects of poor mental health on student populations (both personally, across UW's iSchool, and among students I was TAing), and I started to wonder what critical pedagogical theory might be available on this topic. I also wanted to know what connections have been made between information overload and mental wellbeing -- as I think an important part of information literacy is not overstating the power of information. Thus, I found and read the above article, as something to reflect on while closing out my quarter. The work introduces itself this way: "We ... theorise how public pedagogy is thoroughly entangled with digital technologies, youth subjectivities and learning-knowing about embodied distress. By examining how different pedagogical sites of learning about youth mental ill health are producing new forms of (ab)normal in the digital era, we offer an original contribution that connects debates across critical mental health, public pedagogy and posthumanism" (p. 1-2). And it also covers the topic of mental health literacy -- an interesting intersection of this quarter for me, transversing information literacy, health literacy, and mental health wellbeing. 

This article was really powerful in articulating just how entangled the various messages/information about mental health are, across the physical/digital, formal/informal, and expert/lay. It also helps explain how difficult it is to use traditional ways of knowing to talk about mental health, because it's not true that just because you know a lot about mental health, you'll necessarily be able to cope with mental illness. This rational, western idea of using knowledge to solve problems just doesn't always work when it comes to mental wellbeing. Add to that the blur of information, coming at us from so many sources, and understanding mental health can be very overwhelming.

Much to my relief, it seems like some of this clamor is being reexamined. "Across a range of disciplines there is a growing critique of the ways in which “expert solutions” to emotional distress are permeating formal and informal pedagogic sites in calls for alternative, critical practice and cultural frameworks" (p. 8). The conclusion of this article talks about using various alternative pedagogies, including feminist pedagogy, as a lens for how we talk about and teach about mental health, something that I think would be very welcome. 

Ultimately, while I'm still hopeful about how powerful information literacy is, I want to ensure, in future, that I'm embacing a pedagogical style that also emphasizes mental wellbeing, and leaves space for students to back away when they feel like they can't possibly absorb any more information. If we don't create space for this, I fear we'll end up with students either too burnt out or too frustrated to actually go on to use their information literacy skills for good, and for change.  






